Blogpost on multilingual documentation (#796)
ropensci/roweb3: content/blog/2024-06-10-multilingual-documentation-in-r/index.Rmd

Reviewer: When we have a date, remember to change the folder name too 😁

Similarly, [chilemapas](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/chilemapas/chilemapas.pdf) provides simplified maps for Chile, with full Spanish documentation, including function names.
rOpenSci's own [censo2017](https://docs.ropensci.org/censo2017/) by Mauricio Vargas is also fully documented in Spanish.

Although these packages are more accessible to their primary audience, they are much less accessible to the wider community.
Users who do not speak the language may find it difficult to discover and use the functions that these packages provide.
Package authors face the dilemma of either making their package inaccessible to their target demographic or isolating it from the wider R ecosystem.

The developer of the [utilsIPEA](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/utilsIPEA/index.html) package publicly expressed [the need for bilingual documentation](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/37288823/bilingual-english-and-portuguese-documentation-in-an-r-package), recognising that his package would be used both by people in Brazil, who might prefer documentation in Portuguese, and the broader international community.

> 

Author: Maybe add something like: 

```suggestion
This is also a recurring question in the rOpenSci Slack. 
```

This package also also provides tools for developers to create new translation modules.

```{r}
dir <- file.path(tempdir(), "glue.es")
rhelpi18n::i18n_module_create(module_name = "glue.es", 
                              package_path = "/home/user1/Documents/r-packages/glue",  # I have a copy of glue here. 
                              language = "es", 
                              module_path = dir)
```

This creates a translation module with all the functionality and strings that need translating.
Now the heavy work is to go to the "translations" subdirectory and translate all the strings saved (currently) as yaml files.
For example, the translation file for `glue::as_glue()` is:

```{r,  output.lines=20}
file.path(dir, "translations", "as_glue.yaml") |> 
  readLines() |> 
  cat(sep = "\n")
```

A possible (and crummy) translation would be

```{r, output.lines=30, echo=FALSE}
cat(readLines("as_glue.yaml"), sep = "\n")
```

After modifying "as_glue.yaml" and installing the package, now the documentation is in Spanish.

```{r,  output.lines=20}
library(glue)
help(as_glue)
```

Amazing!

## Come help us!

> 

Reviewer 2: Awesome!

  }
)

# knitr hook to use Hugo highlighting options
knitr::knit_hooks$set(
  source = function(x, options) {
    hlopts <- options$hlopts
    paste0(
      "```r ",
      if (!is.null(hlopts)) {
        paste0("{",
               glue::glue_collapse(
                 glue::glue('{names(hlopts)}={hlopts}'),
                 sep = ","
               ), "}"
        )
      },
      "\n", glue::glue_collapse(x, sep = "\n"), "\n```\n"
    )
  }
)

hook_output <- knitr::knit_hooks$get("output")
knitr::knit_hooks$set(output = function(x, options) {
  lines <- options$output.lines
  if (is.null(lines)) {
    return(hook_output(x, options))  # pass to default hook
  }
  x <- unlist(strsplit(x, "\n"))
  
  if (length(x) > lines) {
    more <- paste0("... (", length(x) - lines, " more lines)")
    # truncate the output, but add ....
    x <- c(head(x, lines), more)
  }
  
  # paste these lines together
  x <- paste(c(x, ""), collapse = "\n")
  hook_output(x, options)
})

help <- function(...) {
  outfile <- tempfile(fileext = ".txt")
  tools::Rd2txt(utils:::.getHelpFile(utils::help(...)), outfile)
  text <- readLines(outfile)
  text <- gsub("_\b", "", text)
  cat(text, sep = "\n")
}
```

> We are happy to announce the R Consortium Multilingual Working Group.

Reviewer: I would also suggest getting the project listed on the [Working groups](https://www.r-consortium.org/all-projects/isc-working-groups) site as well if you know who to bug about that 😁 
```suggestion
We are happy to announce the [R Consortium Multilingual Working Group](https://github.com/RConsortium/multilingual-documentation-wg).
```

> This Working Group will oversee the implementation of multilingual documentation support in R and organise community translation efforts.

Reviewer: Did you want to add a sentence or two about how/when this group formed? A little bit of background?

> Our first project is the (experimental) **rhelpi18n** package, which adds multilingual documentation support!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our first project is the (experimental) [**rhelpi18n**](https://github.com/eliocamp/rhelpi18n) package, which adds multilingual documentation support!
```

Do you want to read the documentation for `base::mean()` (partially) in Spanish?
Install the experimental [rhelpi18n](https://github.com/eliocamp/rhelpi18n) package and the sample translation module base.es:

```{r, eval=FALSE}
# install.packages("pak")

> pak::pak(c("eliocamp/rhelpi18n", "eliocamp/base.es"))

Reviewer: I tried to install these packages like this, and for some reason base.es could only be installed *after* rhelpi18n. Perhaps there's an unstated dependency issue? 

I was able to install it by running
```suggestion
pak::pak("eliocamp/rhelpi18n")
pak::pak("eliocamp/base.es")
```

Author: Indeed! Thanks for catching that! I updated base.es DESCRIPTION, so now it should work correctly.

---
slug: "20424-06-10-multilingual-documentation"
title: Multilingual Documentation in R Packages
# Delete the package_version line below if your post is not about a package
author:
  - Elio Campitelli
# Set the date below to the publication date of your post

> date: 2024-06-10

Reviewer: When we have a date, change it here and in the folder name too

Author: Great. I'll shoot for the 9th

# Minimal tags for a post about a community-contributed package 
# that has passed software peer review are listed below
# Consult the Technical Guidelines for information on choosing tags
tags:
  - R
  - packages

>   - multilingual

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - multilingual
  - documentation
  - community
```

# The summary below will be used by e.g. Mastodon preview cards

> description: "A very short summary of your post (~ 100 characters)"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "Multilingual documentation coming to an R package near you"
```

  text <- readLines(outfile)
  text <- gsub("_\b", "", text)
  cat(text, sep = "\n")
}
```

We are happy to announce the brand-new [R Consortium Multilingual Working Group](https://github.com/RConsortium/multilingual-documentation-wg).
This Working Group came about after discussions during the R Project Sprint 2023 and will oversee the implementation of multilingual documentation support in R and organise community translation efforts.
Our first project is the (experimental) [**rhelpi18n**](https://github.com/eliocamp/rhelpi18n) package, which adds multilingual documentation support!

Do you want to read the documentation for `base::mean()` (partially) in Spanish?
Install the experimental [rhelpi18n](https://github.com/eliocamp/rhelpi18n) package and the sample translation module base.es:

```{r, eval=FALSE}
# install.packages("pak")
pak::pak(c("eliocamp/rhelpi18n", "eliocamp/base.es"))
```

And then run this code:

```{r, output.lines=30, warning=FALSE}
library(rhelpi18n)
Sys.setenv(LANGUAGE = "es")
help(mean) 
```

Nice!
This should work on any R console or IDE.

## Why would you do this?

English is the de facto international language.

> This English hegemony is reflected in R by the use of English in its documentation, such as manual pages, function names, and argument names (why use `mean()` instead of `Mittelwert()`?)

Author: I'd prefer not to add an explicit value judgement to this.

> This English hegemony is reflected in R by the use of English in its documentation, such as manual pages, function names, and argument names (why use `mean()` instead of `Mittelwert()`?)

Reviewer: Good point 😁! I re-read the paragraph and realized that I was thinking of it in negative terms. "Hegemony" isn't in and of itself a negative term, but its contemporary usage is generally perceived as negative (i.e. we generally think that hegemonies aren't a good thing).

But you're right that my suggestion would have made the sentence imply that the R ecosystem was "unfortunate", whereas sticking with "The English hegemony" merely leaves the general, global hegemony unfortunate, which most can recognize.

Both approaches are pushing the limits of what the R language can do in terms of multilingual functionality by trying to find a workaround to the lack of native multilingual support in the R language.
As these solutions are not native, they can become hard to maintain and don't scale well.
A more effective solution would be for R to support multilingual documentation as a standard feature.

That is why we are presenting the experimental **rhelpi18n** package.
This package adds seamless support for multilingual documentation.
A user can load rhelpi18n, install translation modules created by the community, and read R documentation in their language of choice.

## OK, but how?

Translated strings are hosted in the base.es translation module.
This is a regular package with special fields in the DESCRIPTION specifying which package and version is being translated and to which language.
Currently, translated strings are implemented as a list with the original string and the translation of each section in the documentation, but we are also looking at implementing this with traditional .po files, which is the mechanism used by R to translate messages and errors.

> The rhelpi18n package, on the other hand, modifies `utils:::.getHelpFile()`, which all help functions use to fetch documentation strings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The rhelpi18n package modifies `utils:::.getHelpFile()`, which all help functions use to fetch documentation strings.
```

> It adds a few lines to check for relevant translation modules and replaces the original strings with the translated strings on the fly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It adds a few lines of code which check for relevant translation modules (such as base.es) and replaces the original strings with the translated strings on the fly.
```

> This package also provides tools for developers to create new translation modules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to presenting translated documentation, rhelpi18n also provides tools for developers to create new translation modules.
```

```{r, echo=FALSE, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE}
glue_zip <- file.path(tempdir(), "glue.zip")
glue_dir <- file.path(tempdir(), "glue-9f88e2179fc7aa6ff11214271fd61bba169f925c")
dir.create(glue_dir, showWarnings = FALSE, recursive = TRUE)
glue_url <- "https://github.com/tidyverse/glue/archive/9f88e2179fc7aa6ff11214271fd61bba169f925c.zip"

download.file(glue_url, glue_zip)

> unzip(glue_zip, exdir = tempdir())

Reviewer: Ah! That was the problem, I thought it was the installed copy of glue, not the source 😁

```

> 

Reviewer: Moved and edited from below
```suggestion
For example, the following code creates a basic translation module for the glue package, including all the functionality and strings that need translating.
```

```{r}
dir <- file.path(tempdir(), "glue.es")
rhelpi18n::i18n_module_create(module_name = "glue.es", 

>                               package_path = glue_dir,  # I have a copy of glue here. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                              package_path = glue_dir,  # Path to local copy of glue source code
```

>                               package_path = glue_dir,  # I have a copy of glue here. 

Reviewer: Not important for the post, but it'd be pretty cool if you could point rhelpi18n to a GitHub repository (or similar)!

Author: Yes. Although that would add a bit of complexity and dependencies. It might also make less transparent which specific version is being translated. But we need to think about this.

Reviewer: Ah very good point, I guess this is an important consideration whereever the source comes from!

                              language = "es", 
                              module_path = dir)
```

> This creates a translation module with all the functionality and strings that need translating.

Reviewer: Consider moving to above the code?
```suggestion
```

Now the heavy work is to go to the "translations" subdirectory and translate all the strings saved (currently) as YAML files.
For example, the translation file for `glue::as_glue()` is:

> ```{r,  output.lines=20}

Reviewer: I'm not sure you need to share this code?
```suggestion
```{r,  echo = FALSE, output.lines=20}
```

file.path(dir, "translations", "as_glue.yaml") |> 
  readLines() |> 
  cat(sep = "\n")
```

> A possible (and crummy) translation would be

Reviewer: Crummy sounds a little too disparaging 😁 
```suggestion
A possible (and superficial) translation would be
```

```{r, output.lines=30, echo=FALSE}
cat(readLines("as_glue.yaml"), sep = "\n")
```

```{r, echo=FALSE,eval=FALSE}
# file.copy("as_glue.yaml", file.path(dir, "translations", "as_glue.yaml"),
#           overwrite = TRUE)
# pak::local_install(dir)
```

> After modifying "as_glue.yaml" and installing the package, now the documentation is in Spanish.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After modifying "as_glue.yaml" and installing the package, now the documentation is in Spanish 🎉.
```

```{r,  output.lines=20}
library(glue)
help(as_glue)
```

Amazing!

## Next steps

This is all in the early stages and things are moving fast.

> We are still experimenting with various ways of storing translations and implementations of string replacement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are still experimenting with various ways to store translations and implement string replacements.
```

It also has several limitations, such as not translating section headings yet.

> We want to add a clear indication that the text is a translation and a convenient way of quickly accessing the original version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also want to add a clear indication that the text is a translation and a convenient way of quickly accessing the original version.
```

> We are also considering adding metadata to strings to flag cases of automatic translations that haven't been reviewed by a human or translations that might be slightly outdated (it would be a shame to not show a translation because someone fixed a small typo in the original text!).

Reviewer: I felt like this needed a bit of context, have I understood correctly?
```suggestion
Part of the translations workflow often involves automated translations which are later reviewed by a human. So we are also considering adding metadata to strings to flag cases of automatic translations that haven't been reviewed by a human or translations that might be slightly outdated (it would be a shame to not show a translation because someone fixed a small typo in the original text and it had yet to be reviewed!).
```

Author: Yes!

If you want to test the package and report any problems, or you have ideas on how to improve it, you can join the discussion by checking the [open issues](https://github.com/eliocamp/rhelpi18n/issues) of the package and by joining the [Multilingual Documentation Working Group](https://github.com/RConsortium/multilingual-documentation-wg).

> 

Reviewer: Perhaps all on the same line?
```suggestion
```

The developer of the [utilsIPEA](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/utilsIPEA/index.html) package publicly expressed [the need for bilingual documentation](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/37288823/bilingual-english-and-portuguese-documentation-in-an-r-package), recognising that his package would be used both by people in Brazil, who might prefer documentation in Portuguese, and the broader international community.
This problem comes up periodically in the rOpenSci Slack too.

> This is also a recurring question in the rOpenSci Slack. 

Author: Oops. This is now repeated xD. 
```suggestion

```
